# Project Goal

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.
They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis. My job is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis, test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare results with their expected results.

# Project Description

In this project, we applied what we've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, we defined fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and wrote an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

# Data 
Song datasets: all json files are nested in subdirectories under */data/song_data

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the http://millionsongdataset.com/. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here is a filepath:
song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json :

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}


Log datasets: all json files are nested in subdirectories under */data/log_data

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this https://github.com/Interana/eventsim based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here is a filepath:
log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json:

{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"LoggedIn","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}

# Database Schema
Using the song and log datasets, you'll need to create a star schema optimized for queries on song play analysis. This includes the following tables:

Fact Table
songplays - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong > songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

Dimension Tables
users - users in the app > user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level
songs - songs in music database > song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration
artists - artists in music database > artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude
time - timestamps of records in songplays broken down in specific units > start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday


# Data files

test.ipynb displays the first few rows of each table to let you check your database.

create_tables.py drops and creates your tables. You run this file to reset your tables before each time you run your ETL scripts.

etl.ipynb reads and processes a single file from song_data and log_data and loads the data into your tables. This notebook contains detailed instructions on the ETL process for each of the tables.

etl.py reads and processes files from song_data and log_data and loads them into your tables. You can fill this out based on your work in the ETL notebook.

sql_queries.py contains all your sql queries, and is imported into the last three files above.

README.md provides discussion on your project.


# Project Steps

Create Tables
Write CREATE statements in sql_queries.py to create each table.
Write DROP statements in sql_queries.py to drop each table if it exists.
Run create_tables.py to create your database and tables.
Run test.ipynb to confirm the creation of your tables with the correct columns. 
***Make sure to click "Restart kernel" to close the connection to the database after running this notebook.

Build ETL Processes
Follow instructions in the etl.ipynb notebook to develop ETL processes for each table. At the end of each table section, or at the end of the notebook, run test.ipynb to confirm that records were successfully inserted into each table. Remember to rerun create_tables.py to reset your tables before each time you run this notebook.

Build ETL Pipeline
Use what you've completed in etl.ipynb to complete etl.py, where you'll process the entire datasets. Remember to run create_tables.py before running etl.py to reset your tables. Run test.ipynb to confirm your records were successfully inserted into each table.

In the ETL Pipeline, we load the json files from song_data and log_data and put it in a dataframe.Then we select the columns from the dataframe and put it in a list as an input to the tables created. We do this step for the fact table 
songplay and dimension tables users, songs, artists and time. We convert ts column where we have our start_time as timestamp in millisencs to datetime format. We obtain the parameters we need from this date (day, hour, week, etc), and insert everythin into our time dimentional table. Finally we lookup song and artist id from their tables by song name, artist name and song duration that we have on our song play data.Then we end by inserting everything we need into our songplay fact table.


Document Process
Do the following steps in your README.md file.

Discuss the purpose of this database in the context of the startup, Sparkify, and their analytical goals.
State and justify your database schema design and ETL pipeline.
[Optional] Provide example queries https://www.markdownguide.org/basic-syntax/
Markdown Syntax.

NOTE: You will not be able to run test.ipynb, etl.ipynb, or etl.py until you have run create_tables.py at least once to create the sparkifydb database, which these other files connect to.

# Procedure

First, We wrote DROP, CREATE and INSERT query statements in sql_queries.py
Open a Terminal and python create_tables.py
Used test.ipynb to confirm that all tables were created
Completed etl.ipynb to create the pipeline to insert all data into the tables
Run test.ipynb to verify test data
Then fill in etl.py program
Run etl in console by python etl.py
Run test.ipynb to query 
